# AI Transitions in Consumer Marketing

:o2: PDF not needed

Anna Everett

Artificial intelligence in customer service is a slowly integrating
operation. One thing that has already seen an impact is how companies
market to customers. Based on consumer purchases and data collected
from internet browsing, AI allows companies to find patterns in the
habits of its users and tailor their platforms and services to certain
subgroups based on their online behavior.

The nature of this transition comes with the rise and recent
advancements in technology. With Artificial Neural Networks, ANNs,
being a common tool in modern AI. Artificial neural networks are
commonly used for classification prediction based on existing data and
are useful for finding commonalities throughout subgroups of a
company’s consumers. The process of clustering smaller groups from a
larger population is called " Market segmentation " [^1]. This process 
allows marketers to broaden their reach for services while still being 
useful to as many people as possible. It can also help identify 
particular needs within a specific subgroup to ensure they are met 
to the same standard.

A widely common marketing practice is the collection of data to show
targeted content to users. This ranges from targeted ads on social
media to aiding content generation. Based on what websites and media
users choose to interact with, along with their demographics, a
website is able to show them content that is personalized to the user
based on what others like them have found useful or entertaining. The
goal is to maximize the probability of a positive experience for the
user so that they will continue to use that service. A well-known
example of this in popular media would be the Netflix recommendation
algorithm. Depending on content that has been watched in the past,
stored in a watch list, or searched, Netflix is able to suggest
content you might enjoy based on what others with similar habits have
enjoyed and even change thumbnails to pique interest. Going even
further, some websites go beyond targeted content, some websites use
AI to provide personalized interactions with each specific individual.
An increasing number of websites have online chatbots that prompt
people when entering their page, AI is being used to enhance their
experience, increasing engagement with the website by giving instant
access to customer support at any time [^2] and allows the AI to collect
more data and suggest content specific to the individual directly. [^3]

Although the goal of AI usage is to increase a personalized experience
to consumers theres a question about whether personalized content is
actually better than general widespread content. In addition to this,
the increase in AI-consumer interaction means there is bound to be
oversights. for instance, perhaps the AI works too well at predicting
customer habits. A popular story from 2012 notes that a target
algorithm was able to "Figure out a Teen Girl was Pregnant Before Her
Father Did" [^4]. A Forbes article from 2012 tells the story
of a man going into a target and complaining about his teen aged
daughter receiving coupons and advertisements in the mail, seemingly
targeted towards a pregnant woman. It’s later found that the Target
algorithm was doing its job and making predictions about the consumer
based on previous purchases and the man’s daughter was indeed
pregnant. While this incident’s authenticity is questionable, it
brings up the topic of data collection, the use of AI in marketing and
if personalization is worth the cost of privacy.

A benchmark study report from 2016 by Demand Metric covers the
effectiveness of personalized content in general. The study showed
that when measuring content consumption, engagement, and value of
financial opportunities from personalization, participants that had
been exposed to personalized marketing rated it more effective than
those without. In continuation, after the study over 75% of
participants said they were likely to increase the use of content
personalization [^5]

## Refernces
 [^1]: Maanojit Chattopadhyay et al, Application of neural network in market segmentation: A review on recent trends, [Online Resource] https://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=2073339

 [^2]: Korola Karlson, 8 Ways Intelligent Marketers Use Artificial Intelligence, [Online Resource] https://contentmarketinginstitute.com/2017/08/marketers-use-artificial-intelligence/

 [^3]: Orinna Weaver, Chatbot marketing: the marketer that's always on, [Online Resource] https://www.intercom.com/blog/chatbot-marketing/

 [^4]: Kashmir Hill, Forbes: How Target Figured Out A Teen Girl Was Pregnant Before Her Father Did, https://www.forbes.com/sites/kashmirhill/2012/02/16/how-target-figured-out-a-teen-girl-was-pregnant-before-her-father-did/?sh=32f5ea4b6668

 [^5]: EWorkshop: 2016 Content Personalization Benchmark Report Webinar, [Online Resource] htps://www.demandmetric.com/content/eworkshop-2016-content-personalization-benchmark-report-webinar


